Received: 17 April 2024

Revised: 9 December 2024

Accepted: 4 January 2025

DOI: 10.1002/mrm.30437

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Using deep feature distances for evaluating the perceptual
quality of MR image reconstructions
Philip M. Adamson1
Arjun D. Desai1
Jeffrey Dominic1 Maya Varma2
Christian Bluethgen3 Jeff P. Wood4 Ali B. Syed3 Robert D. Boutin3
Kathryn J. Stevens3 Shreyas Vasanawala3 John M. Pauly1 Beliz Gunel1
Akshay S. Chaudhari3,5

1

Department of Electrical Engineering,
Stanford University, Stanford, California,
USA
2

Department of Computer Science,
Stanford University, Stanford, California,
USA
3

Department of Radiology, Stanford
University, Stanford, California, USA
4

Austin Radiological Association, Austin,
Texas, USA

Abstract
Purpose: Commonly used MR image quality (IQ) metrics have poor concordance with radiologist-perceived diagnostic IQ. Here, we develop and explore
deep feature distances (DFDs)—distances computed in a lower-dimensional feature space encoded by a convolutional neural network (CNN)—as improved
perceptual IQ metrics for MR image reconstruction. We further explore the
impact of distribution shifts between images in the DFD CNN encoder training
data and the IQ metric evaluation.

5
Department of Biomedical Data Science,
Stanford University, Stanford, California,
USA

Methods: We compare commonly used IQ metrics (PSNR and SSIM) to

Correspondence
Philip M. Adamson, Department of
Electrical Engineering, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA, USA.
Email: padamson@stanford.edu

trained on large medical imaging datasets. We additionally compare these with

Funding information
Stanford University Radiological Sciences
Laboratory Seed Grant; National Institute
of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin
Diseases, Grant/Award Numbers: R01
AR077604, R01 AR079431; National
Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering, Grant/Award Number:
R01 EB00252; National Science
Foundation Graduate Research
Fellowship Program, Grant/Award
Number: DGE-2146755

two “out-of-domain” DFDs with encoders trained on natural images, an
“in-domain” DFD trained on MR images alone, and two domain-adjacent DFDs
several state-of-the-art but less commonly reported IQ metrics, visual information fidelity (VIF), noise quality metric (NQM), and the high-frequency error
norm (HFEN). IQ metric performance is assessed via correlations with five
expert radiologist reader scores of perceived diagnostic IQ of various accelerated
MR image reconstructions. We characterize the behavior of these IQ metrics
under common distortions expected during image acquisition, including their
sensitivity to acquisition noise.
Results: All DFDs and HFEN correlate more strongly with radiologist-perceived
diagnostic IQ than SSIM, PSNR, and other state-of-the-art metrics, with
correlations being comparable to radiologist inter-reader variability. Surprisingly, out-of-domain DFDs perform comparably to in-domain and
domain-adjacent DFDs.
Conclusion: A suite of IQ metrics, including DFDs and HFEN, should be used
alongside commonly-reported IQ metrics for a more holistic evaluation of MR

Co-senior authors: Beliz Gunel and Akshay S. Chaudhari.
© 2025 International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine.
Magn Reson Med. 2025;1–14.

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/mrm

1

ADAMSON et al.

image reconstruction perceptual quality. We also observe that general vision
encoders are capable of assessing visual IQ even for MR images.
KEYWORDS

deep feature distance, deep learning, image reconstruction, perceptual image quality metrics

1

I N T RO DU CT ION

Compressed sensing and deep learning (DL) techniques
offer significant potential to accelerate MR acquisitions
and remain an active area of research.1–4 Metrics such
as normalized root mean square error (NRMSE), peak
signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), and structural similarity
index measure (SSIM) are routinely used to assess the
image quality (IQ) of MR image reconstructions and
benchmark research methods,5 but are used out of convention rather than because they are particularly well-suited
metrics for assessing perceptual IQ. In a reader study
of 1000 MR images evaluated by five radiologists across
various degradation types, Mason et al. demonstrated
that NRMSE, SSIM, and PSNR have weaker concordance
with radiologist-perceived diagnostic IQ6 than several less
commonly-reported IQ metrics. Although a handful of
studies use radiologist reader scores directly to assess
reconstruction methods,7–9 conducting such time- and
resource-intensive reviews for all methods is expensive,
slows benchmarking, and is generally impractical. Thus,
there is a pressing need to continue developing perceptual
IQ metrics that better correlate with radiologist-perceived
diagnostic IQ and move closer toward diagnostically relevant assessment.
Several prior works have aimed to improve upon these
routinely reported MR IQ metrics. Information-weighted
SSIM (IWSSIM10 ) weights SSIM by assigning higher
importance to regions of the image based on their information content. Multiscale SSIM (MSSSIM11 ) computes
SSIM at various resolution levels across the image, while
feature similarity index measure (FSIM12 ) compares features such as texture, edges, and gradients extracted with
hand-crafted filters. Perceptual difference models are a
class of psycho-physical models that aim to mimic how
humans perceive image quality by modeling the human
visual processing system.13–17 Visual Information Fidelity
(VIF18 ) uses natural image scene statistics to compute the
mutual information between image pairs. The Noise Quality Metric (NQM19 ) computes the SNR of a model-restored
image via a restoration algorithm that accounts for the
impact of spatial frequencies, distance, and contrast masking on contrast sensitivities. As the aforementioned metrics were rigorously assessed in the Mason study,6 we
include only the best overall performing metric (VIF)

and best-performing metric for assessing undersampling
artifacts due to scan acceleration (NQM). We additionally include a third less commonly reported but promising
IQ metric in our investigation, the high-frequency error
norm (HFEN). HFEN aims to capture finer-grained features in MR image reconstructions using a Laplacian of
Gaussian filter, although it is limited to assessing only
high-frequency content.20
Several other common IQ metrics fall outside the scope
of the perceptual IQ metrics studied in this work. The
Fourier radial error spectrum expands upon HFEN by plotting errors in MR image reconstructions as a function of
spatial frequencies, sacrificing the simplicity of a scalar IQ
metric for a more nuanced view of reconstruction errors.21
Other metrics focus on evaluating traditional MR parameters such as noise, spatial resolution, and point-spread
functions,22,23 although relating these parameters to clinical diagnostic utility is less direct. Many works assess
MR reconstructions based on task-specific metrics for segmentation, classification, and detection,24–26 which brings
the IQ assessment closer to the true clinical utility. However, such evaluations either rely on auxiliary DL models with their own intrinsic biases or require additional
time-intensive reader studies to quantify the true diagnostic accuracy.
Recently, Zhang et al. showed that the Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS),27 a type of Deep
Feature Distance (DFD) whereby distances between image
pairs are computed in a lower-dimensional feature space
encoded by a CNN, correlates strongly with human perceived IQ. Although LPIPS and other DFDs28–33 outperform commonly used IQ metrics in terms of correlation
with human perceptual judgments in large-scale computer
vision studies,34 these studies evaluate DFDs on natural
images belonging to the same domain as the images used
for encoder training. To what extent these DFD IQ metrics generalize to out-of-domain data (e.g., MR images)
remains an open question. We gather insights from the
transfer learning literature for medical imaging, where
the transfer of weights from ImageNet35 pre-trained architectures often fails due to distributional shifts and the
difference in features between natural images and downstream medical imaging datasets.36 Pretraining instead
on large medical imaging datasets, such as RadImageNet, leads to better performance on a wide range of

15222594, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mrm.30437 by Stanford University, Wiley Online Library on [10/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2

downstream medical image classification tasks.37,38 In the
absence of a large domain-specific dataset, self-supervised
learning (SSL) on an unlabeled but in-domain dataset
has repeatedly outperformed ImageNet pretraining on a
wide range of downstream medical imaging tasks.38,39
These findings have led to the widespread understanding that domain-specific feature representations are better
than out-of-domain ones, raising the question of whether
domain-specific feature representations are of similar
value in computing DFDs for MR IQ assessment.
In this work, we systematically explore DFDs as perceptual IQ metrics for evaluating MR reconstructions and
assess how they may fit into the landscape of existing MR
IQ metrics, making several novel contributions. First, we
compare DFDs to the commonly used MR IQ metrics of
PSNR and SSIM, as well as several other state-of-the-art
but less commonly reported metrics of VIF, NQM, and
HFEN via correlations to radiologist reader scores of clinically feasible MR reconstruction magnitude images. We
have made these MR images and corresponding radiologist reader scores publicly available. Second, we propose
several domain-specific DFDs to test the hypothesis that
encoders trained on in-domain data (MR images) yield better DFDs for evaluating MR IQ than encoders trained on
out-of-domain (natural image) data. Only one study has
shown that LPIPS outperforms commonly used IQ metrics
in an MR image-based reader study, but it neither explores
whether natural image DFDs are optimal for MR images
nor does it evaluate MR images with clinically feasible
corruptions of accelerated MR image reconstructions.40
Finally, as IQ metrics should be sensitive to imperfections
that are expected of reconstructions in a clinical setting, we
interrogate the behavior of these metrics under acquisition
errors (e.g., poor SNR or motion artifacts), sparse sampling
reconstruction errors (aliasing artifacts), and errors resulting from imperfect reconstruction methods. In light of the
recent “hidden noise” problem,41 the bias present in conventional reconstruction IQ metrics introduced by acquisition noise in “ground truth” data, we additionally assess
how perceptual IQ metrics perform under increasing
acquisition noise. All data and code necessary to reproduce
the results in this study have been made publicly available.

2
2.1

M ET H ODS
MR image reconstructions

We used the fastMRI multi-coil knee dataset with sparse
and fully acquired k-space data for DL-based accelerated
MR image reconstructions.42 Supervised DL reconstruction models were trained to reconstruct accelerated scans
of 2×, 4×, and 6× using a UNet model and an unrolled

3

network.2 The UNet models followed the architecture in
the fastMRI challenge,42 while the unrolled models followed the fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm
(FISTA) unrolled architecture43 implemented in.2 Reference images were computed from the fully sampled
k-space data with the eSPIRIT method to integrate coil
sensitivities.44 The magnitude of the complex image data
was taken for both the evaluation by radiologists and the
computation of IQ metrics. We split the dataset into training, validation, and testing splits with 27 774 slices (778 3D
scans), 6968 slices (195 scans), and 7135 slices (199 scans),
respectively. Additional architecture and training details
are provided in Appendix A.

2.2

Reader study criteria

Five radiologists rated the diagnostic quality of the center slice of 366 accelerated MR reconstruction magnitude
images from 61 patients, each reconstructed with the six
models described above. The reader study was blinded so
that the readers did not have access to the image IDs or
reconstruction methods, nor the scores provided by other
readers. The radiologists provided two scores for the image
reconstructions, one for aliasing artifacts and another for
the diagnostic quality of the cartilage and meniscus (the
most commonly evaluated tissues on knee MRI) on the following 1–9 scale: (1) completely nondiagnostic, (3) severe
corruptions, (5) diagnostically acceptable, (7) good quality, (9) perfect quality. The mean radiologist IQ score was
compared with various IQ metrics from which the Spearman Rank Order Correlation Coefficient (SROCC) was
computed, following precedent from large-scale computer
vision IQ metric studies.34 SROCC measures the strength
of the monotonic (but not necessarily linear) relationship
between reader scores and IQ metrics. We computed the
inter-reader variability in our reader study via the SROCC
of each reader score against the mean score of the other
four readers. The inter-reader variability is then the mean
of each of these five SROCC values.

2.3
Commonly used image quality
metrics
The most commonly used IQ metrics to evaluate the IQ of
MR reconstruction magnitude images are normalized root
mean square error (NRMSE), peak signal-to-noise ratio
(PSNR), and structural similarity index measure (SSIM).5
The MSE between a fully sampled ground truth image
x ∈ RHxW and a reconstructed image x̂ is given by
1 ∑∑
|x(i, 𝑗) − x̂ (i, 𝑗)|2
NM i 𝑗
N

MSE(x, x̂ ) =

M

(1)

15222594, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mrm.30437 by Stanford University, Wiley Online Library on [10/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ADAMSON et al.

ADAMSON et al.

which is then normalized in the NRMSE by
√
MSE(x, x̂ )
NRMSE(x, x̂ ) = ∑N ∑M
,
2
i=1 𝑗=1 x(i, 𝑗)

(2)

PSNR compares the MSE to the maximum ground
truth image intensity by
(
)
max(|x|2 )
PSNR(x, x̂ ) = 10 log10
,
(3)
MSE(x, x̂ )

considering both the degradation of the signal and the
inherent information content of the ground truth image.18
NQM evaluates the reconstructed image by considering
spatial frequency response, luminance adaptation, and
contrast masking effects. We implement VIF and NQM
in Python following the procedures described in18 and,19
respectively.
The high-frequency error norm (HFEN) assesses differences in the high-frequency content of images and is
given by
HFEN(x, x̂ ) = ||LoG(x) − LoG(̂x)||2 ,

SSIM is a combined measure of the luminance, contrast, and structure of the image given by45
SSIM(x, x̂ ) = l(x, x̂ ) ⋅ c(x, x̂ ) ⋅ s(x, x̂ ),

(4)

where luminance l assesses the mean pixel values across
the images, contrast c measures the similarity of the standard deviations of the pixel values across the images, and
structure s compares the similarity in the spatial distribution of the pixel intensities by measuring covariances
across the images.45

2.4

(5)

where LoG is a rotationally symmetric Laplacian of Gaussian filter with a kernel size of 15 × 15 pixels and a standard
deviation of 1.5 pixels.13

2.5

Deep feature distances (DFDs)

In general, we define a DFD (𝛿) between the fully sampled ground truth image x ∈ RCxHxW and the reconstructed
image x̂ as
𝛿l (x, x̂ ) = G(𝜙(l)
(x), 𝜙(l)
(̂x)),
(6)
D
D

Other state-of-the-art IQ metrics

Although less routinely reported than the preceding IQ
metrics,5 VIF, NQM, and HFEN have shown promise
in prior work. VIF quantifies the mutual information
between the ground truth and reconstructed images,

where G is a distance measure and 𝜙(l)
maps from the
D
image space RCxHxW to feature space RCl xHl xWl using a CNN
encoder trained on a dataset D with features extracted
from convolutional layer l. The DFD calculation is shown
schematically in Figure 1.

FIGURE 1
Schematic
demonstrating the calculation
of a Deep Feature Distance
(DFD) between a fully-sampled
ground truth MR image (blue)
and a reconstructed MR image
(orange). The images are
passed through a CNN encoder
𝜙 trained on a dataset D, from
which their respective feature
(x) are
representations 𝜙(l)
D
extracted from layer l. A DFD is
the distance G between these
feature representations. The
encoder training schemes, for
example, out-of-domain
(LPIPS, trained on natural
images), domain-adjacent
(RINFD, trained on a variety of
medical images), and
in-domain (SSFD, trained on
MR images alone) DFDs are
shown here.

15222594, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mrm.30437 by Stanford University, Wiley Online Library on [10/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

4

2.5.1

Out-of-domain DFDs

We evaluated several state-of-the-art DFDs used in natural
domain IQ assessment34 to serve as benchmarks for the
domain-specific DFDs proposed in this study. We refer to
these DFDs as “out-of-domain” in the sense that natural
images belong to a different image domain than the MR
images on which the DFDs are computed and evaluated in
the radiologist reader study.
We used two DFDs based on natural images, LPIPS
and the Deep Image Structure and Texture Similarity index
(DISTS),28 which have been used as benchmark IQ metrics
in large-scale computer vision IQ metric studies.34 LPIPS
uses an L2-norm for G, VGG-1646 trained on ImageNet for
𝜙D , and additionally learns a linear combination of DFDs
extracted from five different convolutional layers l based
on perceptual judgment scores. DISTS uses the same 𝜙(l)
D
as LPIPS, but with a distance function G inspired by the
form of SSIM that assesses texture and structure similarity of the feature maps. Like LPIPS, DISTS combines DFDs
from various layers l as a learned weighted sum. Additional
implementation details are provided in Appendix B.1.

2.5.2

In-domain DFD

To test the hypothesis that in-domain DFDs have more
utility as a DFD IQ metric than out-of-domain DFDs, we
propose a self-supervised feature distance (SSFD47 ) using
an encoder 𝜙(l)
trained in a self-supervised fashion on the
D
same MR dataset D used to train the reader study DL
reconstruction models (described in Section 2.1).
The in-domain DFD, SSFD, utilizes a self-supervised
model trained on the fastMRI knee dataset described in
2.1 with a self-supervised in-painting task48 following optimal parameters from a prior transfer learning study for
knee cartilage segmentation.49 Image corruptions for the
in-painting task were generated dynamically during training by placing zero filled image patches of 16 × 16 pixels
on 25% of the image area via Poisson variable density sampling (to ensure nonoverlapping patches), as shown in
Figure 1. A self-supervised UNet model with two convolutions per level and five levels was trained to in-paint the
zero-filled patches and restore the original image subject to
an MSE loss. SSFD is then the DFD using the SSL encoder
as 𝜙(l)
with layer l = 7 and MSE for G. Additional details
D
of the SSFD implementation are provided in Appendix
B.2. SSFD design choices such as the impact of patch size
and coverage in the SSL in-painting pretext task, and the
impact of the DFD encoder layer l and distance function
G, are explored in Appendix F.
To assess how SSFD IQ performance scales with its SSL
training dataset size, we trained additional SSFD models

5

with 5% 10%, 25%, and 50% of the original 27 774 MR
slice training dataset. We hypothesize that SSFD should
improve as an IQ metric with larger dataset sizes, but
the primary purpose of this experiment was to inform
the potential benefit SSFD may achieve by expanding its
dataset size beyond just the fastMRI dataset, because we
compare with natural image DFD baselines trained on the
much larger ImageNet dataset.
To further interrogate the importance of
domain-specific DFD training, we explored a distributional shift within the fastMRI knee dataset itself, the
presence of fat suppression in the knee MR acquisitions.
To this end, we trained two SSFD models on fat-suppressed
(390 volumes, 13 918 slices) and non-fat-suppressed MR
images (388 volumes, 13 856 slices) alone, and evaluated their correlation with radiologist reader scores on
the fat-suppressed (n = 168) and non-fat-suppressed
(n = 198) data separately.

2.5.3

Domain-adjacent DFDs

We propose two additional DFDs in this study that leverage
pre-existing DL models trained on large medical imaging
datasets. We refer to these as “domain-adjacent” DFDs
because the medical imaging datasets D are not limited
to the fastMRI dataset used in the reader study reconstructions and contain medical images from modalities
beyond MR due to the lack of a large and labeled MR-only
dataset. These domain-adjacent DFDs additionally differ
from SSFD in that they are trained in a supervised manner
and on dataset sizes closer to that of the ImageNet dataset
used for natural image DFD encoder training.
We used the RadImageNet model,37 a ResNet50
pre-trained on 1.4 million labeled medical images (including 670 000 MRI images) trained in a supervised manner,
to compute a RadImageNet Feature Distance (RINFD). To
disentangle the model architecture 𝜙 from the training
data D, we also compared RINFD with both a ResNet50
trained with ImageNet and a ResNet50 with randomly
initialized, untrained weights. Additional details of the
RINFD implementation are provided in Appendix B.3.
We propose a second domain-adjacent DFD that leverages the Medical Variational Autoencoder (Med-VAE), a
VAE designed for neural compression trained on dataset
D with 1 million radiograph and mammography images.50
Med-VAE is a convolutional VAE trained with a combination of a perceptual loss, a patch-based adversarial objective, and a penalty based on the Kullback–Leibler (KL)
divergence.50 We use the VAE bottleneck latent embeddings (their compressed representations) for 𝜙(l)
. AddiD
tional details of the implementation of Med-VAEFD are
provided in Appendix B.3.

15222594, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mrm.30437 by Stanford University, Wiley Online Library on [10/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ADAMSON et al.

2.6
noise

ADAMSON et al.

IQ metric sensitivity to acquisition

In light of recent work elucidating the bias of conventional
IQ metrics due to “hidden noise”,41 the susceptibility of IQ
metrics to biases due to acquisition noise in “ground truth”
reconstruction data is of great interest. We aim to assess
how the performance of the IQ metric, again assessed by
correlations with radiologist-perceived diagnostic quality,
may be impacted by this acquisition noise present in the
reference images. To this end, we add complex Gaussian
noise to the raw coil k-space data by scaling the original
inter-channel covariance matrix of each scan to two, three,
and four times the original noise level, and reconstruct
new “ground truth” images using these simulated noisier
k-space datasets. We then compute correlation to reader
scores of the accelerated MR reconstructions using these
noisier reference images to assess how sensitive the metric’s assessment of perceptual IQ may be to the acquisition
noise itself.

2.7

IQ metrics under perturbations

To understand the sensitivity of IQ metrics to other distortions and imperfections that may be expected of reconstructions in clinical settings, we explored the impact of
additive Gaussian noise, blurring, translational shifts, and
motion artifacts on the IQ metrics investigated in the
reader study. Each perturbation was applied to each of the
199 scans in the test set after normalizing to zero mean,
unit variance. The maximum extent of each image perturbation was chosen so that the average SSIM between the
ground truth and the corrupted images reached 0.6. The
additive Gaussian noise standard deviation increased linearly from 0 to 0.1. Blurring was performed by low-pass
filtering k-space with increasing cut-off frequencies. Pixel
shifts were applied by rolling pixels in the left-right direction with tricubic interpolation from 0 to 0.55 mm (1.25
pixels). Motion artifacts were introduced by modeling rigid
motion between MR acquisition shots as random phase
errors that alter odd and even lines of k-space separately,
following the procedure in.51 The motion was linearly
increased between 𝛼 = [0, 0.6), where 𝛼 denotes the amplitude of the phase errors as in,51 but using deterministic
phases rather than random ones.

3
3.1

R E S U LTS
IQ metrics versus radiologist review

The mean reader score across five radiologists for the
366 reconstructions in the reader study are plotted

against exemplary commonly used (SSIM and PSNR)
and state-of-the-art IQ metrics (VIF), as well as one
example DFD from each category - out-of-domain DFD
(LPIPS), in-domain DFD (SSFD), and domain-adjacent
DFD (RINFD) in Figure 2. Corresponding plots for the
remaining IQ metrics assessed in this study are shown
in Appendix D. Example images of each reconstruction type are shown in Appendix C. Correlations in
terms of SROCC of mean reader scores versus commonly
used IQ metrics (PSNR, SSIM, and NRMSE), less routinely reported state-of-the-art IQ metrics (VIF, NQM,
HFEN), out-of-domain DFDs (VGG-16 with ImageNet
weights, LPIPS and DISTS with VGG-16 backbones and
ImageNet weights, and ResNet50 with ImageNet weights),
the in-domain DFD (SSFD), and domain-adjacent DFDs
(RINFD and Med-VAEFD) are shown in Figure 3.
We observe that all DFDs along with HFEN substantially outperform VIF and NQM, which in turn outperform PSNR, SSIM, and NRMSE as in.6 The DFDs and
HFEN even approach or exceed inter-reader variability (SROCC of 0.85, more details in Appendix E. Interestingly, we observe that out-of-domain DFDs perform
comparably to in-domain and domain-adjacent DFDs. In
the fixed-encoder architecture case, for example, training the ResNet50 encoder with the out-of-domain ImageNet dataset (Aliasing SROCC 0.88, Cartilage/Meniscus
SROCC 0.87) performs comparably to training with the
domain-adjacent RadImageNet dataset (Aliasing SROCC
0.87, Cartilage/Meniscus SROCC 0.85). This is a surprising finding considering the importance of domain-specific
pretraining in comparable transfer learning studies.37,38
The in-domain SSFD likewise does not outperform any
of the out-of-domain DFDs, although it is on par with
inter-reader variability.
To explore whether these findings hold across different subsets of the MR image reconstruction dataset,
the correlations are shown separately for different slices
of data from the reader study by acceleration (2×,
4×, 6×) and model architecture (UNet vs. Unrolled) in
Figure 4. Generally, DFDs and HFEN outperform all
other IQ metrics across these different subsets of data,
while out-of-domain DFDs still perform comparably to
in-domain and domain-adjacent DFDs. One exception
to this trend is that RINFD underperforms other DFDs
and HFEN at 6× acceleration, indicating that some IQ
metrics may be better suited under different accelerated
reconstruction evaluation settings. Also, note that the
higher SROCC in the 4× accelerations is due to the
increased dynamic range of radiologist image quality
scores in the 4× acceleration set compared with the 2× and
6× accelerations.
Training image acquisition-specific SSFD models (fat-suppressed vs. non-fat-suppressed) did not

15222594, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mrm.30437 by Stanford University, Wiley Online Library on [10/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6

7

FIGURE 2
Example commonly used (SSIM, PSNR), state-of-the-art (VIF), out-of-domain DFD (LPIPS), in-domain DFD (SSFD) and
domain-adjacent DFD (RINFD) IQ metric values versus mean reader scores for aliasing (top) and cartilage/mensiscus assessment (bottom).
Each point corresponds to a single image taken from the center slice from 61 MR image reconstruction images, each with 2× (blue), 4×
(black), and 6× (orange) accelerations with a UNet (circle) and unrolled (X’s) networks. Higher reader score values correspond to better
radiologist-perceived IQ.

FIGURE 3
Mean reader score correlations with commonly used (PSNR, SSIM, and NRMSE), less commonly used state-of-the-art (VIF,
NQM, HFEN), and DFD IQ metrics based on encoder training data domain D. Aliasing reader score SROCC values are shown on the left with
cartilage and meniscus reader score SROCCs on the right. DFDs and HFEN outperform VIF and NQM, which in turn outperform SSIM and
PSNR. The DFDs and HFEN correlations are comparable to the inter-reader variability between the five readers (shown in black ± 1 standard
deviation), but out-of-domain DFDs perform comparably as an MR image reconstruction IQ metric to in-domain and domain-adjacent DFDs.

substantially improve SROCC on the respective slices of
data, despite the two acquisition techniques’ substantially
different qualitative appearance and image intensity statistics (Table 1). This further corroborates the observation
that in-distribution SSL training does not outperform
out-of-distribution SSL training for DFD IQ metrics.

As a function of the size of the training dataset, SSFD
achieves comparable performance when trained with half
of the dataset, but decreases slightly when only 25% of
the dataset is used (Table 2). This suggests that curating
even larger in-domain datasets for the SSFD encoder SSL
training could yield a marginal improvement.

15222594, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mrm.30437 by Stanford University, Wiley Online Library on [10/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ADAMSON et al.

ADAMSON et al.

FIGURE 4
Aliasing (left) and cartilage/meniscus (right) reader score correlations with IQ metrics across different slices of data in the
reader study, filtering by acceleration factor (2×, 4×, 6×) on top, and model architecture (UNet vs. Unrolled) on the bottom. Inter-reader
variability between the five readers shown in black (+- 1 standard deviation). Generally, out-of-domain DFDs perform comparably to
domain-adjacent and in-domain DFDs across different extents of reconstruction errors and different DL reconstruction methods. Commonly
used IQ metrics underperform inter-reader variability across all subsets of data, while DFDs and HFEN perform comparably to inter-reader
variability (shown in black ± 1 standard deviation). Some IQ metrics may be better suited in different reconstruction settings, for example,
LPIPS at 6× acceleration.

TA B L E 1
Reader score correlation to SSFD with the SSL
encoder trained with fat-suppressed (FS) only MR images (390
volumes, 13 918 slices), non-fat-suppressed (non-FS) only MR
images (388 volumes, 13 856 slices), and both.
Fat Suppressed
SROCC
SSFD SSL
data type

non-Fat
Suppressed SROCC

Aliasing

Cartilage/
Meniscus

Aliasing

Cartilage/
Meniscus

FS

0.84

0.86

0.85

0.85

Non-FS

0.82

0.83

0.85

0.85

Both

0.83

0.84

0.85

0.84

Note: Reader score correlations are shown with (n = 168) and without
(n = 198) fat suppression in the evaluation set separately. MR
contrast-specific SSL training provides no obvious benefit.

TA B L E 2
SSFD correlation with reader scores as a function
of the percent of SSL training data used.
SSFD % SSL
training data

Aliasing
SROCC

Cartilage/
Meniscus
SROCC

5%

0.77

0.77

10%

0.79

0.78

25%

0.78

0.78

50%

0.83

0.81

100%

0.84

0.83

Note: SSFD performance as an IQ metric begins to drop at 25% of the
original SSFD training dataset size (27 774 2D slices).

15222594, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mrm.30437 by Stanford University, Wiley Online Library on [10/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

8

3.2
noise

IQ metric sensitivity to acquisition

The SROCC of IQ metrics to reader scores under increasing levels of acquisition noise present in the original
reference scans is shown in Figure 5. The correlation
of SSIM and NRMSE decreases substantially under
increasing acquisition noise, decreasing by 0.17–0.19 and
0.11–0.12, respectively, when k-space coil noise quadruples, corroborating the potential bias of SSIM and NRMSE
under acquisition noise demonstrated in prior work.41 We
observe that DFDs and HFEN continue to outperform
other IQ metrics in terms of SROCC to reader scores as
acquisition noise increases. We also observe that LPIPS,

9

RINFD, and HFEN still match IRV even when using
reference scans with four times the original k-space coil
noise, each decreasing by 0.03 or less in SROCC (orange,
pink, and light green in Figure 5). We note that while
acquisition noise changes the absolute IQ metric values, it
preserves monotonicity to radiologist-perceived diagnostic
quality, the ultimate goal of this work. For example, the
mean RINFD (pink in Figure 5) values increase by 12%
across the dataset under four times the acquisition noise,
but SROCC decreases by only 0.01–0.02. In contrast to
other DFDs, SSFD decreases by 0.09–0.10 in SROCC under
four times the acquisition noise, suggesting that in-domain
DFDs may not generalize well to data with noise levels not
present in the training data.

FIGURE 5
Mean reader score correlations as a function of acquisition noise in the reference data to commonly used (SSIM, PSNR,
NRMSE), less commonly used state-of-the-art (VIF, NQM, HFEN), and DFD IQ metrics based on encoder training data domain D. Complex
Gaussian noise is added to the original k-space data by scaling the inter-channel covariance matrix (𝜎0 ). Aliasing reader score SROCC values
are shown on top with cartilage and meniscus reader score SROCCs on the bottom. DFDs and HFEN outperform other IQ metrics as
acquisition noise increases, while LPIPS, RINFD, and HFEN still match inter-reader variability (shown in black ± 1 standard deviation) even
when using reference scans with four times the original acquisition noise.

15222594, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mrm.30437 by Stanford University, Wiley Online Library on [10/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ADAMSON et al.

3.3

ADAMSON et al.

Metrics under perturbations

The impact of noise, blurring, translational shifts, and
motion artifacts on commonly used (SSIM, PSNR) and
example state-of-the-art (HFEN), in-domain DFD (SSFD),
domain-adjacent DFD (RINFD), and out-of-domain DFD
(LPIPS) IQ metrics are explored in Figure 6. Ideally,
MR IQ metrics should increase monotonically as noise,
blurring, and motion artifacts increase as these artifacts

tend to diminish the diagnostic quality of the image,
while sensitivity to translation depends on the context
of the study. As we only test the perceived diagnostic
quality explicitly under clinically realistic acceleration
errors, the purpose of this section is to test whether these
metrics are sensitive to other sources of image quality
degradation as well. Sensitivity to perturbations is measured based on the IQ metric change per unit perturbation, where the unit perturbation is normalized against

FIGURE 6
IQ metrics vs. perturbation extent, chosen to achieve comparable changes in SSIM, for increasing Gaussian noise, blurring,
translation, and motion artifacts (bottom). Example images demonstrating each perturbation type at the extent indicated by the arrow, where
the roll image is the difference between the perturbed and original scan (top). All IQ metrics are sensitive to clinically realistic image
corruptions, while DFDs are relatively insensitive to pixel shifts (e.g., HFEN, yellow versus RINFD, green).

15222594, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mrm.30437 by Stanford University, Wiley Online Library on [10/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

10

SSIM such that SSIM reaches 0.6 for each unit perturbation type.
We find that the DFDs increase monotonically with
increasing levels of noise, blurring, and motion, indicating that these DFD metrics behave desirably to clinically
realistic image imperfections. Per unit perturbation, the
DFD IQ metrics of SSFD, LPIPS, and RINFD are relatively insensitive to translational pixel shifts. Under one
unit perturbation, for example, HFEN (yellow in Figure 6)
was more sensitive to translation (0.84 ± 0.07) than noise
(0.54 ± 0.17) and motion (0.69 ± 0.10), while increasing to
80% of its value under unit blur (0.94 ± 0.05). RINFD (yellow in Figure 6) on the other hand increased to just 0.10 ±
0.04 under unit translation, only 6% of the RINFD increase
under any other unit perturbations—noise (1.61 ± 0.93),
blur (4.08 ± 0.62) or motion (2.76 ± 0.60 ). This indicates
that DFDs capture more global IQ features that are less
sensitive to exact pixel-level correspondence than other
IQ metrics. This finding confirms our hypothesis that
the convolutional nature of CNNs makes them translationally invariant and therefore less sensitive to translational shifts. DFDs may then be used as an alternative
IQ metric in contexts where exact pixel-level correspondence is not necessarily required for clinical purposes.
For example, settings where spatial registration is needed
to align image pairs, such as CT-to-MR modality translation,52,53 may not require perfect registration for diagnostic
utility.

4

DISCUSSION

In this study, we explored using DFDs as IQ metrics for MR
image reconstruction evaluation, and compared with both
commonly used and other state-of-the-art but less commonly reported IQ metrics. In particular, we evaluated the
extent to which distributional shifts between the encoder
training dataset and the evaluation data impact the performance of these DFDs. To this end, we compared benchmark out-of-domain DFDs from the natural image domain
(LPIPS, DISTS) to two domain-adjacent DFDs trained on
medical imaging data (RINFD, Med-VAEFD), and finally
an in-domain DFD trained on data from the same distribution as the evaluation task (SSFD). We conducted a reader
study to find that HFEN and DFD had an improved correlation with radiologist-perceived diagnostic IQ compared
with commonly used and other state-of-the-art IQ metrics
in the literature. We also find that most DFDs appear to
be robust to varying levels of acquisition noise compared
with commonly used metrics such as NRMSE and SSIM.
We have made the images and radiologist reader scores
in this study publicly available so that the MR reconstruction community can move toward building evaluation

11

metrics that move closer toward diagnostically relevant
assessment. We further assessed the behavior of DFDs
under clinically realistic image perturbations such as poor
SNR and motion artifacts.
We observed that all DFDs and HFEN outperform
commonly used and other state-of-the-art IQ metrics
for MR image reconstruction in terms of correlation
with radiologist-perceived diagnostic IQ. Remarkably, we
observe that HFEN and DFDs perform as well or better than radiologist inter-observer variability, suggesting
that these IQ metrics perform as well as radiologists in
determining the perceived diagnostic quality of MR reconstructed images. Although HFEN correlates remarkably
strongly with DFDs and perceived diagnostic quality in
this study of accelerated MR reconstructions, it explicitly
captures high-frequency information and therefore may
struggle in other MR IQ settings with more low-frequency
content such as MR contrast synthesis.54 Future work
should examine the behavior of these IQ metrics in settings
beyond accelerated MR reconstruction.
However, we do not observe that domain-specific training of the DFD encoder improves its performance as an
IQ metric for MR image reconstruction. This result is surprising considering the importance of distribution shifts
in learned feature representations in the transfer learning literature.37,38 While we surmise that any learned
convolutional filters, independent of the training data
domain, may be used as high-dimensional feature extractors for estimating image quality, further theoretical work
is required to understand these empirical findings. One
limitation of this finding is the differing dataset sizes
between the data domains and the need for self-supervised
learning for the in-domain DFD setting. However, limited
medical imaging data compared with natural image data
is a practical limitation in many real-world settings.
There are several limitations to the reader study conducted here. First, it relies on radiologist-perceived diagnostic image quality as the gold standard and a proxy of
diagnostic value. Although there is a precedent for this
in other radiologist reader studies,6,40 radiologist perceptions of image quality may not be directly correlated with
true diagnostic accuracy. Future work could address this
limitation by conducting a clinical study to assess the true
diagnostic accuracy of radiologists in different diagnostic
tasks on MR images under different reconstruction methods. Another limitation of this work is that the reader study
was limited to assessing magnitude images in the fastMRI
multi-coil knee dataset. Future work should investigate
whether these results hold across different anatomies and
MRI acquisition techniques, as well as MR reconstruction evaluation settings that extend beyond single-slice
magnitude-only evaluations such as complex or multichannel reconstructions.

15222594, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mrm.30437 by Stanford University, Wiley Online Library on [10/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ADAMSON et al.

One limitation of the perturbation experiment is that
it approximates only some of the many potential artifacts and challenges present with MR images. Future work
should assess, for example, the impact of blurring due to
off-resonance effects and the impact of MR field inhomogeneities. We also did not conduct an additional reader
study to correlate radiologist reviews with these metrics
across various perturbations.
A limitation of the acquisition noise experiment is
that we do not ever explicitly evaluate against a noise-free
image (which does not exist). Previous work aimed to
mimic having access to “noise-free” reference data by
denoising the reference image using a Stein’s Unbiased
Risk Estimator (SURE)-based method;55 however, the
authors point out that such denoising techniques likely
cause the image to lose some real image features as well,
which may introduce IQ metric biases of its own. Simulating increasing noise levels at least gives insight into
how the IQ metric correlations to reader scores may be
impacted by varying levels of acquisition noise. The robustness of the correlations of HFEN, LPIPS, and RINFD to
radiologist-perceived diagnostic quality even in the presence of four times the acquisition noise levels should give
researchers confidence that these metrics hold their utility
in assessing perceptual IQ in spite of the “hidden noise”
problem.41
Although SSFD does not appear to generalize as well
to higher levels of acquisition noise, we note that if
used “in-domain” on the original fastMRI knee dataset
as intended, its correlation with radiologist-perceived
diagnostic quality remains comparable to other DFDs.
It is notable that SSFD performance decreases when
used under a different noise distribution, while LPIPS
and RINFD still perform well on out-of-domain and
domain-adjacent data. SSFD differs from these DFD
encoder models in that it was trained only on original fastMRI image reconstructions with its narrow distribution of acquisition noise. The out-of-domain and
domain-adjacent DFDs, on the other hand, may be able
to generalize better precisely because of the larger and
heterogeneous datasets on which they were trained,
allowing them to better generalize to various noise
distributions.
Based on our findings, we recommend that MR reconstruction researchers report a suite of IQ metrics including
DFDs and HFEN in future work, so that these methods
may be benchmarked by metrics with a stronger concordance to radiologist-perceived diagnostic quality. A suite
of IQ metrics also has the benefit of capturing different
aspects of perceived diagnostic image quality, as demonstrated in.6 Overall, our findings demonstrate that DFDs
could help align the benchmarking of research methods in MR reconstruction with diagnostically relevant

ADAMSON et al.

assessment, accelerating the path from research innovation to clinical translation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the ISMRM Reproducible Research
Study Group for conducting a code review of the code
supplied in the Data Availability Statement. The scope of
the code review covered only the code’s ease of download,
quality of documentation, and ability to run, but did not
consider scientific accuracy or code efficiency.
FUNDING INFORMATION
This work was supported by NIH R01 AR077604,
R01EB002524, R01 AR079431. It was also supported by
the Stanford University Radiological Sciences Laboratory
Seed Grant and the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship
under Grant No. DGE-2146755.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
All experiments were carried out in meddlr, an
open source config-based Python library for machine
learning-based medical image reconstruction.56 All code,
data and DFD encoder models to reproduce results in this
study have been provided at. We hope that the release of
the accelerated MR radiologist reader score dataset helps
the MR image reconstruction community to continue to
build better IQ metrics.
ORCID
Philip M. Adamson https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5028
-0683
Arjun D. Desai https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0645-3257
Robert D. Boutin https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7887
-9658
Beliz Gunel https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2541-4157
Akshay S. Chaudhari https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3667
-6796
REFERENCES
1. Lustig M, Donoho D, Pauly JM. Sparse MRI: The application
of compressed sensing for rapid MR imaging. Magnetic resonance in medicine. J Int Soc Mag Resonance Med. 2007;58(6):
1182-1195.
2. Sandino CM, Cheng JY, Chen F, Mardani M, Pauly JM,
Vasanawala SS. Compressed sensing: from research to clinical practice with deep neural networks: shortening scan times
for magnetic resonance imaging. IEEE Signal Process Mag.
2020;37:117-127.
3. Hammernik K, Schlemper J, Qin C, Duan J, Summers
RM, Rueckert D. Systematic evaluation of iterative deep
neural networks for fast parallel MRI reconstruction with
sensitivity-weighted coil combination. Magn Reson Med.
2021;86(4):1859-1872.

15222594, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mrm.30437 by Stanford University, Wiley Online Library on [10/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

12

4. Hammernik K, Klatzer T, Kobler E, et al. Learning a variational
network for reconstruction of accelerated MRI data. Magn Reson
Med. 2018;79(6):3055-3071.
5. Chen Y, Schönlieb C-B, Lio P, et al. AI-based reconstruction for
fast MRI—a systematic review and meta-analysis. Proc IEEE.
2022;110:224-245.
6. Mason A, Rioux J, Clarke SE, et al. Comparison of objective image quality metrics to expert radiologists’ scoring of
diagnostic quality of MR images. IEEE Trans Med Imaging.
2019;39(4):1064-1072.
7. Chaudhari AS, Fang Z, Kogan F, et al. Super-resolution
musculoskeletal MRI using deep learning. Magn Reson Med.
2018;80(5):2139-2154.
8. Chaudhari AS, Stevens KJ, Wood JP, et al. Utility of
deep learning super-resolution in the context of osteoarthritis MRI biomarkers. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2020;51:
768-779.
9. Mardani M, Gong E, Cheng JY, et al. Deep generative adversarial
neural networks for compressive sensing MRI. IEEE Trans Med
Imaging. 2018;38(1):167-179.
10. Wang Z, Li Q. Information content weighting for perceptual image quality assessment. IEEE Trans Image Process.
2010;20(5):1185-1198.
11. Wang Z, Simoncelli EP, Bovik AC. Multiscale structural similarity for image quality assessment. In: The Thrity-Seventh Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems & Computers. Vol 2. IEEE;
2003:1398-1402 2003.
12. Zhang L, Zhang L, Mou X, Zhang D. FSIM: a feature similarity
index for image quality assessment. IEEE Trans Image Process.
2011;20(8):2378-2386.
13. Miao J, Huo D, Wilson DL. Quantitative image quality evaluation of MR images using perceptual difference models. Med
Phys. 2008;35(6Part1):2541-2553.
14. Mantiuk R, Kim KJ, Rempel AG, Heidrich W. HDRVDP-2: a calibrated visual metric for visibility and quality
predictions in all luminance conditions. ACM Trans Graph.
2011;30(4):1-14.
15. Miao J, Huang F, Narayan S, Wilson DL. A new perceptual
difference model for diagnostically relevant quantitative image
quality evaluation: a preliminary study. Magn Reson Imaging.
2013;31(4):596-603.
16. Salem KA, Lewin JS, Aschoff AJ, Duerk JL, Wilson DL. Validation of a human vision model for image quality evaluation of fast
interventional magnetic resonance imaging. J Electron Imaging.
2002;11:224-235.
17. Daly SJ. Visible differences predictor: an algorithm for the
assessment of image fidelity. In: Human Vision, Visual Processing, and Digital Display III. Vol 1666. SPIE; 1992:2-15.
18. Sheikh HR, Bovik AC. Image information and visual quality.
IEEE Trans Image Process. 2006;15:430-444.
19. Damera-Venkata N, Kite TD, Geisler WS, Evans BL, Bovik AC.
Image quality assessment based on a degradation model. IEEE
Trans Image Process. 2000;9:636-650.
20. Ravishankar S, Bresler Y. MR image reconstruction from highly
undersampled k-space data by dictionary learning. IEEE Trans
Med Imaging. 2010;30:1028-1041.
21. Kim TH, Haldar JP. The Fourier radial error spectrum plot:
a more nuanced quantitative evaluation of image reconstruction quality. In: 2018 IEEE 15th International Symposium on
Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2018). IEEE; 2018:61-64.

13

22. Chan C-C, Haldar JP. Local perturbation responses and checkerboard tests: characterization tools for nonlinear MRI methods.
Magn Reson Med. 2021;86(4):1873-1887.
23. Kleineisel J, Lauer K, Borzì A, Bley TA, Köstler H, Wech T. Assessment of resolution and noise in magnetic resonance images
reconstructed by data driven approaches. Z Med Phys. 2023.
24. Desai AD, Schmidt AM, Rubin EB, et al. Skm-tea: A
dataset for accelerated mri reconstruction with dense image
labels for quantitative clinical evaluation. arXiv preprint.
2022:arXiv:2203.06823.
25. Zhao R, Zhang Y, Yaman B, Lungren MP, Hansen MS.
End-to-end AI-based MRI reconstruction and lesion detection
pipeline for evaluation of deep learning image reconstruction.
arXiv preprint. 2021:rXiv:2109.11524.
26. Zhao R, Yaman B, Zhang Y, et al. fastMRI+, clinical pathology annotations for knee and brain fully sampled magnetic
resonance imaging data. Sci Data. 2022;9:152.
27. Zhang R, Isola P, Efros AA, Shechtman E, Wang O. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. IEEE; 2018:586-595.
28. Ding K, Ma K, Wang S, Simoncelli EP. Image quality assessment:
unifying structure and texture similarity. IEEE Trans Pattern
Anal Mach Intell. 2020;44:2567-2581.
29. Cong H, Fu L, Zhang R, et al. Image quality assessment with
gradient siamese network. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE;
2022:1201-1210.
30. Cheon M, Yoon S-J, Kang B, Lee J. Perceptual image quality
assessment with transformers. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE;
2021:433-442.
31. Lao S, Gong Y, Shi S, et al. Attentions help cnns see better:
attention-based hybrid image quality assessment network. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. IEEE; 2022:1140-1149.
32. Conde MV, Burchi M, Timofte R. Conformer and blind noisy
students for improved image quality assessment. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. IEEE; 2022:940-950.
33. Keshari A, Subudhi B. Multi-scale features and parallel
transformers based image quality assessment. arXiv preprint,
arXiv:2204.09779 2022.
34. Gu J, Cai H, Dong C, et al. NTIRE 2022 challenge on perceptual image quality assessment. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE;
2022:951-967.
35. Deng J, Dong W, Socher R, Li L-J, Li K, Fei-Fei L. Imagenet: a large-scale hierarchical image database. In: 2009 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE;
2009:248-255.
36. Raghu M, Zhang C, Kleinberg J, Bengio S. Transfusion: understanding transfer learning for medical imaging. Adv Neural Inf
Proces Syst. 2019;32.
37. Mei X, Liu Z, Robson PM, et al. RadImageNet: an open radiologic deep learning research dataset for effective transfer learning. Radiology. Artif Intell. 2022;4:e210315.
38. Cadrin-Chênevert A. Moving from ImageNet to RadImageNet
for improved transfer learning and generalizability. Radiology.
Artif Intell. 2022;4:e220126.

15222594, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mrm.30437 by Stanford University, Wiley Online Library on [10/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ADAMSON et al.

39. Huang S-C, Pareek A, Jensen M, Lungren MP, Yeung S, Chaudhari AS. Self-supervised learning for medical image classification: a systematic review and implementation guidelines. NPJ
Digital Med. 2023;6:74.
40. Kastryulin S, Zakirov J, Pezzotti N, Dylov DV. Image quality assessment for magnetic resonance imaging. IEEE Access.
2023;11:14154-14168.
41. Wang J, An D, Haldar JP. The “Hidden noise” problem in MR
image reconstruction. Magn Reson Med. 2024;92(3):982-996.
42. Florian K, Jure Z, Anuroop S. fastMRI: a publicly available raw
k-space and DICOM dataset of knee images for accelerated MR
image reconstruction using machine learning. Radiol Artif Intell.
2020;2:e190007.
43. Xin L, Wang D, Shi W. FISTA-CSNet: a deep compressed sensing network by unrolling iterative optimization algorithm. Vis
Comput. 2023;39:4177-4193.
44. Uecker M, Lai P, Murphy MJ, et al. ESPIRiT—an eigenvalue
approach to autocalibrating parallel MRI: where SENSE meets
GRAPPA. Magn Reson Med. 2014;71:990-1001.
45. Wang Z, Bovik AC, Sheikh HR, Simoncelli EP. Image quality
assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE
Trans Image Process. 2004;13:600-612.
46. Simonyan K, Zisserman A. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition. arXiv preprint. 2014:
arXiv:1409.1556.
47. Adamson PM, Gunel B, Dominic J, et al. SSFD: self-supervised
feature distance as an MR image reconstruction quality metric. In: NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Deep Learning and Inverse
Problems. Neural Information Processing Systems Foundation;
2021.
48. Pathak D, Krahenbuhl P, Donahue J, Darrell T. Efros Alexei a.
context encoders: feature learning by inpainting. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. IEEE; 2016:2536-2544.
49. Dominic J, Bhaskhar N, Desai AD, et al. Improving
data-efficiency and robustness of medical imaging segmentation
using Inpainting-based self-supervised learning. Bioengineering.
2023;10:207.
50. Van der Sluijs R, Varma M, Prince J, Langlotz C, Chaudhari AS.
Diagnostically lossless compression of medical images. In: ICML

ADAMSON et al.

51.

52.

53.
54.

55.

2023 Workshop Neural Compression: From Information Theory
to Applications. Internation Machine Learning Society; 2023.
Desai AD, Gunel B, Ozturkler BM, et al. VORTEX:
physics-driven data augmentations using consistency training
for robust accelerated MRI reconstruction. arXiv preprint. 2021:
arXiv:2111.02549.
Li W, Li Y, Qin W, et al. Magnetic resonance image (MRI)
synthesis from brain computed tomography (CT) images
based on deep learning methods for magnetic resonance
(MR)-guided radiotherapy. Quant Imaging Med Surg. 2020;10:
1223.
Jin C-B, Kim H, Liu M, et al. Deep CT to MR synthesis using
paired and unpaired data. Sensors. 2019;19:2361.
Dar SUH, Yurt M, Karacan L, Erdem A, Erdem E, Cukur T.
Image synthesis in multi-contrast MRI with conditional
generative adversarial networks. IEEE Trans Med Imaging.
2019;38:2375-2388.
Luisier F, Blu T. SURE-LET multichannel image denoising:
Interscale orthonormal wavelet thresholding. IEEE Trans Image
Process. 2008;17:482-492.

56. Desai AD, Ozturkler BM, Sandino CM, et al. Noise2Recon:
enabling SNR-robust MRI reconstruction with semi-supervised
and self-supervised learning. Magn Reson Med. 2023;90:
2052-2070.

SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Additional supporting information may be found in the
online version of the article at the publisher’s website.
Data S1. Supporting Information.

How to cite this article: Adamson PM, Desai AD,
Dominic J, et al. Using deep feature distances for
evaluating the perceptual quality of MR
image reconstructions. Magn Reson Med. 2025;1-14.
doi: 10.1002/mrm.30437

15222594, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mrm.30437 by Stanford University, Wiley Online Library on [10/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14

